coming out soon we're gonna be releasing
dr k's guides to mental health the guys
are organized into three modules
so the depression module is designed for
people to understand
like how depression works how i think
about depression
the anxiety module is for people who are
interested in learning more about
anxiety like not just from a clinical
perspective but also understanding from
a mental perspective how anxiety works
in the mind like where do anxious
thoughts come from
how do they propagate things like that
you know something that i'm super
excited about is also the meditation
module so for those of you who are
curious
about understanding you know my approach
to meditation like what are the
different
it's there's a lot of theoretical
understanding as well as
um you know 20 practices or more so if
you guys are interested in that you know
go ahead and check out the guides
so oh [ __ ] do i have to summarize now
okay what we're talking about is
dopamine detox
okay we're talking about like the actual
neuroscience of a dopamine detox
and we're about to dive into how to do
it so let me give you guys a quick
summary
so we started off by looking at like
you know other people who talk about
dopamine detox on the internet
and like really don't i don't think
there's a whole lot of good
clinical or neuroscientific information
there we went over like what the
dopamine reward circuits are what they
look like and how
messing with the dopaminergic parts of
our brain creates a particular
presentation of like dopamine tolerance
okay
that presentation is characterized by
three things so as a clinician
the three things that i look for when
i'm thinking about recommending a
dopamine detox are
number one you are compelled towards a
behavior
that you don't enjoy okay
number two there is a war
in your brain between the things that
you know you should be doing
and that but you can't what you should
do always
loses to like this impulsive like
behavioral like fast food kind of
enjoyment sort of thing
so i should be working on my resume but
i'm just gonna queue for
a game of valor interleague or whatever
okay third thing
is that activities that seem pleasurable
to other people
don't seem to be as enjoyable to you so
if you kind of check those three boxes
and you have a
c constant constant stream of like
dopaminergic activity like video games
or social media or reddit or whatever
then you may be right for dopamine detox
okay now we're gonna get to the actual
okay so dr k
how do you dopamine detox remember
that the first thing is that what we
want to do is give our brain a chance to
down regulate the receptors
so what we're talking about is probably
a two week minimum
of dopamine detox okay otherwise your
receptors aren't gonna doubt like
they're not gonna upregulate the way
that they should
that's the first thing the second thing
to understand is that the main problem
with the dopamine detox
is boredom so what i want you all to
mentally prepare yourselves for
is that the way that your dopamine
circuitry is wired
things that should feel pleasurable are
not going to feel pleasurable
so what you're going to deal with is two
weeks of boredom that's the raid boss
okay
it's not about like withdrawal it's not
about like
you know sweats or like you're just
gonna be bored
so you need to be mentally prepared that
what you're going to be fighting against
is boredom
okay next thing to consider
is that um what we want to really try to
do is minimize
our dopaminergic activity and what i
mean by dopaminergic activity it doesn't
mean that you actually can't have
fun what i want you all to minimize is
that compulsive behavior that you don't
actually enjoy
so video games social media content
aggregation so steer clear of like
reddit youtube things like that
um some things that involve like
technology are totally fine like so for
example if you want to watch a movie
even watch
one movie every day i think that's
totally fine
time limited not like constant scrolling
stuff
time limited enjoyable activities even
involving technology are completely fine
you want to steer clear of the stuff
that your brain veges out on so don't
binge watch a tv show
no vegging out while you're watching
like netflix or amazon prime or
something like that
no binge watching anime you want to
watch like
a naruto movie like go for it it's not
going to be fun either way whether your
dopamine system is messed up or not
right so you can actually watch like a
movie like by all means go for it
no big deal so dopamine detox two weeks
main thing that you're going to have to
deal with is boredom you want to cut out
dopaminergic activities
so these are like the the the dirty
like the mcnuggets of dopamine that you
do right so like content aggregation
like video games even stuff like twitch
like discrete technological activities
that are highly enjoyable
and like a short limited time span are
actually fine if you want to watch
one movie a day go for it okay so the
other thing that i would recommend so
like like the way that you're gonna do
this successfully so since boredom is
your enemy like planning out your day is
gonna be a huge part of it okay
books audiobooks doing stuff in nature
cleaning cooking
adopt uh skills like like a skills
learning program or something like that
those kinds of things are going to be
your your bastion so what i would say is
like you know on a
let's say you want to start on the
weekend so friday evening what you're
gonna do is grocery shopping
and you're gonna plan out your meals for
like saturday and sunday
you're gonna plan out okay like this is
what i'm gonna do in the morning
this is what i'm gonna do in the
afternoon get yourself like a good
audiobook
okay so like good audiobooks are going
to be really really important for like
relatively boring activities so while
you're cleaning your kitchen like listen
to an
audio book find a good podcast you want
to be like doing stuff
and the more that you pack your day the
better off it's going to be
in terms of like you know not relapsing
because remember that when you relapse
what's gonna happen is your mind is
gonna be bored and before you realize it
you're gonna pick up your phone and
you're just gonna be like on twitch or
whatever
or youtube or whatever okay so social
activities
are also really good so like i think
board game night totally fine like by
all means get together with a few of
your buddies
play some terraforming mars like play d
d like go for it like a good six eight
hour session of d
with people ideally in person because
you got to be careful about computers
because it's really easy to open up tabs
when you get bored and things like that
so i'd steer clear of that but like it's
totally fine to do
fun activities i think if you want to do
something like go camping like that's
the perfect time to do a dopamine detox
because you got to do things like
pitching your tent and like you know
making your food and then like you know
like changing and like camping like has
stuff involved
so spending time in nature going hiking
those are fantastic opportunities to do
dopamine detoxes so if you guys are
doing something like going on a ski trip
or going on vacation
this is a good opportunity for you to
like take stuff off of your phone right
like remove reddit from your phone
remove all that stuff if you have
something like a tablet by all means
download like three movies over the
course of a week
and that's like what you're gonna watch
but you're not gonna like stream random
crap
okay so next thing
um to remember is that unstructured time
is the
primary source of failure in dopamine
detox okay
when your mind is bored and you don't
have something planned it's way too
easy to like dig into the the easy
dopamine mcnugget
all right the mcdopamy so next thing to
kind of think about is that if you guys
are running into trouble
i recommend doing it with friends now
you don't have to do this necessarily
with in-person friends but i'd find like
two or three people like
um you know maybe like sometimes people
will like get together with people on
discord and things like that
where you know you'll kind of decide
okay we're gonna do dopamine detox from
you know june 9th to june
20th okay or june 22nd whatever
and then people kind of plan out okay
what's your plan like let's let's like
read a book together
let's like you know meet every day on
discord like we'll check in about how
things are going like
you know you guys can help each other
out a little bit um
and yeah that's it so
last kind of tip is remember the more
accessible the dopaminergic activities
are
the easier it is going to be to relapse
so what you want to do and this is kind
of interesting so if you look at the
research
a lot of relapses are not planned out
they're
impulse decisions so if you look at
alcohol relapses for example like i've
been sober for a year
i go to a kid's birthday party my kids
like my kids friend's birthday party
my kid's friend's dad is there and he's
like hey do you want a drink and it's
like an impulsive decision it's like
sure
everyone else is having a beer like why
can't i have a beer too and then it's
like boom relapse
then i've had 10 and i'm vomiting and
whatever
so what you want to do is increase the
activation energy and make things less
accessible
so uninstall all the video games and
then like at least you have that
amount of time so let's say that i
uninstall everything and then i like
start reinstalling it when i relapse
but then i've got like a 15 30 minute
window where i can still like
catch myself right i can get out of the
house i can go for a walk i can even
cancel the installation
so you want to give yourself time and so
like uninstall all the crap
uninstall the dopaminergic activities
log out of like your netflix account
like log out of your reddit account like
if you want to you can even use websites
that block things
like reddit and stuff like that go for
it or tools
and so that's kind of a dopamine detox
so two weeks highly structured activity
plan what you're gonna do cooking
cleaning traveling
nature books audiobooks some kind of
creative work if you want to learn a
skill
and kind of tell yourself okay at the
end of two weeks
i could learn i could have learned how
to xxx
right like whatever you want to do x y z
i could have learned how to speak
100 words of spanish in two weeks and so
work on those goals
use people's help and like that's kind
of how you do dopamine detox